[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Welcome
to "Beyond Belief."
Nick Pope has worked for the
United Kingdom's Ministry
of Defence for 21-plus years.
His career was to man a
special desk, a UFO desk.
It's an amazing story,
Nick Pope, the fact
that you have done this.
You've come to "Beyond Belief,"
and many other programs
admitting this.
It's pretty dramatic, isn't it?
>>NICK POPE: Yes.
And unlike some of the claims
you hear in this field,
it's absolutely 100% verifiable.
You can pick up the phone.
Talk to the Ministry of
Defence press office,
and they will confirm
that was my job.
And it's been mentioned
in British Parliament.
And there's a paper trail of
documents auditing everything
that I did.
And indeed, as we've
discussed before,
and it's quite widely known
now, the British government
is in the middle of a program
to declassify and release
many of the files and documents
relating to my former job.
So all this is now getting
out into the public domain.
And we're beginning to
have a debate about it.
>>NOORY: That's exciting.
How was it created?
I mean, who at the British
Ministry of Defence said,
"Let's man a UFO desk to study
these incredible stories,
and then let's find a
guy named Nick Pope"?
How did that happen?
>>POPE: Well, it dates
way back, actually,
to the Second World
War, when we had
the sightings of these
so-called foo fighters.
And the Royal Air Force got
a number of these sightings,
not just balls of
light, which is,
I think, people's perception
of what the foo fighters were.
Actually, some--
>>NOORY: Flying alongside
our craft, right?
>>POPE: Absolutely.
Speeds and maneuvers
that we couldn't match.
And the perception at first
was that this was some sort
of Nazi secret weapon.
After the war, it turned
out the Germans had seen
and Japanese had
seen things too,
and they'd thought it
was an allied weapon.
But some of these things
weren't balls of light.
They were structured
metallic-looking craft.
So that's when the British
government first got into this.
But it was actually some
years later, in 1953,
before we had a formally set
up constituted UFO program
with terms of
reference and suchlike.
Before that, it was just
done on an ad hoc basis.
>>NOORY: Would you
see cases that would
come across your desk and you
read them, and went, oh my god.
I mean, were you that
baffled by some of these?
>>POPE: Yes.
I mean, most of the
sightings, of course,
didn't get that reaction.
The day-to-day job was--
>>NOORY: Pretty mundane.
>>POPE: Yeah.
You'd be looking at radar tapes.
You'd be analyzing
photos and videos.
And 9 times out
of 10, you'd find
a conventional explanation;
aircraft, weather balloons,
meteors, satellites,
et cetera, et cetera.
But yes, absolutely.
There were some,
oh-my-gosh moments.
And particularly when we
had military witnesses.
We had UFOs tracked
simultaneously on radar--
again, as I mentioned
with the Second World War,
but this goes on to
this day, of course--
speeds and maneuvers
that we can't match.
And when you've got
a pilot telling you,
I was chasing this
thing and suddenly,
zip off to the horizon,
you just-- what can you say
to someone in that position?
Do you say, that's probably
just a weather balloon.
No.
Of course, not.
>>NOORY: Did you have
the Rendlesham case
come across your desk at all?
>>POPE: Yes.
I--
>>NOORY: Explain
that one for us.
>>POPE: Well, this was Britain's
best-known and most compelling
UFO incident.
It took place over a series of
three nights in December 1980
at Bentwaters and Woodbridge,
which were actually
operated by the US Air Force,
but they were on British soil.
And on the first
night of activity,
a UFO actually landed.
And some of the people got close
enough to see strange symbols.
>>NOORY: In the forest.
>>POPE: In the forest.
Yes.
Rendlesham Forest lies
between the twin bases
of Bentwaters and Woodbridge.
They're about a mile apart.
And so this thing
landed in the forest.
They saw strange symbols on the
side that looked a little bit
like Egyptian hieroglyphics.
>>NOORY: How big was the craft?
>>POPE: About 9 feet
across, 6 feet high,
roughly triangular in size.
>>NOORY: Not huge.
>>POPE: Not huge.
No, no.
And this forced its way down,
smashing through some treetops
into a fairly small clearing.
So this was not immense.
But on a subsequent
night, the witnesses
included the deputy base
commander, Lieutenant Colonel
Charles Holt. Now, it didn't
land on either the second
or the third night.
But Holt saw this
thing performing
these extraordinary
maneuvers above his head.
>>NOORY: So it landed
the first night.
Took off again.
>>POPE: Took off again.
>>NOORY: And then
came back and hovered.
>>POPE: It came back, yes,
on a second and particularly
a third night, when
the witnesses included
Charles Holt. Holt took a
team of about half a dozen men
out effectively trying
to chase this thing,
trying to run it to
Earth, so to speak.
But at one point, it
fired a narrow beam
of light down at the ground just
in front of him and his men.
And he-- looking back
on this, he said, wow.
He said, was this a weapon?
>>NOORY: Right.
>>POPE: Was this a warning?
Was this communication?
>>NOORY: Stay away from us.
>>POPE: Yeah.
>>NOORY: That kind of thing.
>>POPE: He didn't know.
But I-- to answer your
question, yes, this absolutely
came my way.
Now, it took place before
my time on the UFO project,
but I did a cold case
review in about '93-'94.
And I reinvestigated,
reinterviewed
a lot of the witnesses, looked
at the various documents
we got.
I looked at the scientific
data that we had in terms
of the Defence Intelligence
staff analyzed radioactivity
levels taken at
the landing site.
And their assessment
was that this
seemed significantly higher
than the average background.
And that's a direct
quote from a document
that's now been declassified.
>>NOORY: Now, let's
jump ahead many years.
And there's a program called
AATIP that you've investigated.
Tell us about that.
>>POPE: Well, AATIP stands
for Advanced Aerospace Threat
Identification
Program, or does it?
There's a debate about that.
It is essentially the US
government's UFO program.
Now, for years, the US
government, of course,
had Project Sign, then
Grudge, then Blue Book.
>>NOORY: Blue Book.
Sure.
>>POPE: But in 1969,
they said, well,
this subject is no
longer of any interest.
We have terminated
Project Blue Book.
Nobody is investigating.
And a lot of people
were saying, that's not
particularly credible.
There must be a program.
It turns out there was.
And at least for some of that
time, it was called AATIP.
Now, I mentioned there
was a debate even
about the name, Advanced
Aerospace Threat Identification
Program.
>>NOORY: That's an
interesting name.
>>POPE: It is.
But some people say it's
Advanced Aviation Threat
Identification Program.
And then when we began
to get one or two
documents about this, it was
Advanced Aerospace Threat
and Identification Program.
Now, you might think
an and here and there
isn't particularly important.
>>NOORY: It doesn't mean much.
>>POPE: But it might.
It might if you make a
Freedom of Information Act
request, as many people have.
And you're asking
for the wrong thing.
But you know, there's
another facet to all this.
It seems to have been--
AATIP seems to have fallen
out of a wider program called
AAWSAP, which was Advanced
Aerospace Weapons System
Application Program.
>>NOORY: Geez.
>>POPE: It's real alphabet soup.
>>NOORY: Well, were we
concerned about the Soviets
or were we concerned about
an extraterrestrial threat?
>>POPE: They have been
very cagey about this,
as you can imagine.
There has been very little
public acknowledgment
of this, apart from a
grudging confirmation
from a couple of
Pentagon spokespeople
that, yes, we had this program.
>>NOORY: Right.
They've gone forward.
>>POPE: They've tried
to spin it as being
a program looking at next
generation aviation threats.
But I think it's pretty clear
that this was about UFOs.
And we--
>>NOORY: And you're pretty
convinced about that?
>>POPE: Absolutely.
I think there are a
number of pointers
here, not least the fact
that those people involved
in setting up this program
said it was about UFOs.
I mean, this was set up
largely at the instigation
of the former Senate
Majority Leader Harry Reid.
In around 2006-2007, Harry
Reid was having discussions
with the astronaut John Glenn.
And they were saying,
look, we should
be doing more about UFOs.
Pilots are seeing these
things, but there's nowhere
for them to report.
>>NOORY: Well, John Glenn,
when he was in space,
saw some strange things
outside of his spacecraft.
>>POPE: Yes.
And a couple of the
other astronauts
have seen things, too.
And although he didn't see
things, he had, I suppose,
what he described as a
spiritual experience.
I'm talking about
Edgar Mitchell.
And Edgar Mitchell in his
later years, of course,
was very vocal about UFOs.
>>NOORY: Yes.
>>POPE: Not through
a personal sighting.
>>NOORY: Apollo 14 astronaut.
He walked on the Moon.
>>POPE: All-American hero.
And when somebody like that
says, not only is this real,
but it's extraterrestrial,
and I believe
there's a cover up, you'd
better sit up and pay attention,
people.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
How many people were involved
with this AATIP program?
>>POPE: Not many.
There's still much more that we
don't know about this program.
We know that Harry Reid,
following his discussions
with John Glenn, got
together with a couple
of other senators,
set this thing up.
We know--
>>NOORY: Spent $22
million doing it.
>>POPE: $22 million
to put a contract out.
Now, this is an
interesting point.
A lot of the AATIP work
was done by contractors,
and specifically
Bigelow Aerospace.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>POPE: Robert
Bigelow, of course,
no stranger to this subject
and somebody with a childhood
experience.
>>NOORY: He's a believer.
>>POPE: He's absolutely.
And he did that very famous
interview where they said,
do you believe in this?
And he said, I don't believe it.
I know it.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
"60 Minutes."
>>POPE: And I think
the interviewer went
on in, as you say,
"60 Minutes," to say,
don't you worry that people
will think you're crazy?
And he said, I don't care.
But when he said, I
know this to be true--
>>NOORY: He was even
more blunt than that.
>>POPE: Well, yeah.
Was he talking about AATIP?
Now, with what we know
now, the suspicion is yes.
His knowledge of this in
part came from the fact
that Bigelow Aerospace got a
lot of the AATIP contract work.
Now, that takes it
largely outside the scope
of the Freedom of
Information Act,
because of the exemption that
applies to private contractors.
And it also means that not only
do the people involved in AATIP
have their security oath,
government security oath.
They have private sector
nondisclosure agreements too.
One of the only people to
talk about this on the record
is the guy who ran it for a
number of years, Luis Elizondo.
>>NOORY: He's very believable.
>>POPE: Credible.
I've spoken to him
a number of times.
Met him once.
Obviously, there are
some similarities
and some differences in
the programs that we ran.
>>NOORY: Nick, you put
together a movie on AATIP.
>>POPE: Yes.
>>NOORY: What was
the name of it?
>>POPE: "Aliens
at the Pentagon."
>>NOORY: Let's take a look
at part of your trailer.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Nick, if the trailer is any
indication of what the film is,
you've got a blockbuster here.
>>POPE: I hope so.
And what I've tried to do
in that is tell the AATIP
story in a way that
encapsulates all the information
we know, but makes it readily
digestible for people,
whether they're
new to the subject
or whether they're
deep specialists.
It's a real data
mining exercise.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
How did AATIP come to
the public's forefront?
>>POPE: Well, "The New
York Times" broke the story
just over a year ago.
And they put it
on the front page.
And they were closely
followed by "The Washington
Post" and Politico.
>>NOORY: That's
dramatic coverage.
>>POPE: It doesn't get much
more dramatic than that.
For years, these were the sorts
of mainstream media outlets
that either didn't touch
this subject at all,
or if they did, occasionally,
it was in a sort of ridiculing,
jocular fashion.
>>NOORY: Yes, very humorous.
>>POPE: But now
this was undeniable.
The government said for
years after Blue Book closed
we didn't have a program.
And then they found out that
this AATIP project existed.
And there's been some
staggeringly little pushback.
And the ramifications
of this are immense.
I mean, the government,
successive administrations
said there's no
program, and there was.
So front page of "The New York
Times," global media coverage.
And it took this subject
out of the fringe
and into the mainstream in a
way that I haven't seen before
in my time in this subject.
>>NOORY: Rock musician
Tom DeLonge from Blink-182
put together a group called
Stars of the Academy.
And he is looking for
disclosure as well.
Is he tied into the
AATIP program at all?
Or where is that?
>>POPE: It's a sort of
dotted line connection.
Tom DeLonge, to the
best of my knowledge,
has never worked
for the government.
But he has a passion for this.
He assembled around him
an extraordinary team
of people, many
of whom had served
in government and in the
intelligence community.
>>NOORY: Are they
whistleblowers?
>>POPE: I would not categorize
them as whistleblowers,
because to me,
whistleblowers are
speaking without authorization
and they are leaking things.
Well, I've sat down
with Lou Elizondo.
And he is a patriot
and a loyal man.
>>NOORY: Government official.
>>POPE: Yeah.
>>NOORY: He was.
>>POPE: He's only
speaking about this
because the government
have confirmed
the existence of
the program itself.
I mean, the same
situation as me.
I don't consider
myself a whistleblower.
But Tom DeLonge has assembled
this team of people,
Lou Elizondo, but also
other people involved
like Hal Puthoff, Eric
Davis, a number of scientists
who've looked at--
I guess you'd call it
almost fringe science
from within the government and
the intelligence community.
Now, taking forward some of
that work outside of government
in this privately funded--
I think it's a public benefit
corporation the To the Stars
Academy of Arts and Sciences.
>>NOORY: They have
private stockholders now.
>>POPE: Yeah.
And so what Tom DeLonge has done
is assemble this team really
to continue some of the work
that was being done by AATIP
and maybe by a similar program.
>>NOORY: Is AATIP still around
or has it been disbanded?
>>POPE: That is a really
important question.
And nobody really
knows the answer.
Lou Elizondo said--
his phrase was,
we never got a stand down order.
And in the military and in
the intelligence community,
you carry on with the mission
until you are stood down.
So he is very much implying
certainly-- maybe he stated--
that it's still running.
Others, when you look at the
Pentagon spokespeople who
grudgingly confirmed
that there's a program,
they've tried to spin the line
that this kind of terminated
in about 2012.
The honest answer is
we don't really know.
This is one of the big
unanswered questions.
>>NOORY: In your film
"Aliens at the Pentagon,"
you have highlighted a story
that the Department of Defense
released in 2017.
And that was these Navy jets
chasing what could be a UFO.
>>POPE: Absolutely.
>> (ON VIDEO) It's a
[BLEEP] drone, bro.
>> (ON VIDEO) There's
a whole fleet of them.
Look on the ASA.
>> (ON VIDEO) My gosh!
>> (ON VIDEO) They're
going against the wind.
The wind's 120 knots
out of the west.
>> (ON VIDEO) Look
at that thing, dude!
>> (ON VIDEO) That's not
an L&S, though, is it?
>> (ON VIDEO) That
is an L&S, dude.
>> (ON VIDEO) Well,
if there's a--
>> (ON VIDEO) Look
at that thing!
>> (ON VIDEO) It's rotating.
>>NOORY: Nick, I spent
nine years in the Navy.
These fighter pilots
are darn serious folks.
They mean what they do.
What the heck were they chasing?
>>POPE: We don't know.
For want of a better
phrase, it's a UFO or a UAP,
if you prefer the
terminology that we
used in the UK, Unidentified
Aerial Phenomena.
But it was real.
It was being tracked on radar.
We now not only
have those films.
And there are three of those
films that we know about.
There are more still in the
Pentagon that I hope will be--
>>NOORY: This is
not made up stuff.
>>POPE: No.
Absolutely.
And what's more, at
least two of the pilots
and one of the radar
operators are now publicly
on the record with this, given
that the government has itself
confirmed all this.
And David Fravor,
one of the pilots,
he kind of gave this classic
quote, I think, about this.
He said, I don't know
what the heck it was,
but I sure want to fly one.
>>NOORY: So the craft
were shaped like Tic Tacs.
>>POPE: Yeah.
A kind of oval-shaped craft.
That was one of them.
But as I said, there are
at least three videos
that we've seen now.
Many more of them
are still somewhere
in the basement
in the Pentagon or
some other three-letter agency.
Who knows?
There's still a lot of
debate and controversy
about where all these different
programs are being run out of.
And what they do-- this
is typical government,
by the way--
they change the
title of the program.
We talked about the
different versions.
Well, it wouldn't surprise me if
some of that wasn't deliberate.
And sometimes these things move
between different agencies.
We know that the DIA
had it for a while.
Then--
>>NOORY: Passed it on.
>>POPE: Passed it back to
the Department of Defense.
So where it is now,
goodness only knows.
It's the devil's
own business to try
and spring information
from the government when
it comes to this sort of thing.
>>NOORY: Nick, how many cases
has AATIP looked at like this?
>>POPE: We don't know.
But sitting down talking to
Lou Elizondo about it, I mean,
he was a busy guy.
So three videos that we've seen.
Dozens more.
But many of the things that
they looked at probably
didn't involve videos.
I mean, not everyone who
sees these things, of course,
gets it on film.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>POPE: And that
applies to the military.
>>NOORY: Yeah, I haven't
heard of that in a long time.
>>POPE: No.
So I think this is
one of the things
that we still have to
discover about this.
And people like Elizondo
have to be careful.
He is only going to be
able to talk about things
that the government
have themselves
declassified and confirmed.
Otherwise, he does
cross that line.
>>NOORY: Right.
So he may know more.
>>POPE: Oh, he does know more.
I mean, you can't sit
in an agency like that
and do a job like that
and not know more.
>>NOORY: Why would they
classify some and not others?
>>POPE: Well, I think any
time you look at something
in government, the
question you ask
is, what is the
consequence of disclosure?
And people talk-- when I'm
talking about disclosure,
I don't just mean to the
American people, because--
>>NOORY: To the world.
>>POPE: It's to the world.
So when you put information
out there in the public domain,
it's not just going
to the American people
and to our friends
around the world,
but it's going to the Russians,
the Chinese, the Iranians,
the North Koreans, ISIS.
>>NOORY: They already
know, though, Nick.
>>POPE: Well--
>>NOORY: We've had the case
of the Iranian pilots chasing
a UFO.
We know that the Russians
have been doing this.
I don't see any reason
to hide this anymore.
>>POPE: Not a reason,
maybe, to hide it,
but there is a reason, I think,
to hide what we know about it,
because, look,
technology acquisition is
at the heart of a lot
of the secrecy here.
>>NOORY: True.
True.
>>POPE: And if you look at one
of the most important documents
about AATIP that we have,
it's a June 24, 2009 letter
from Harry Reid to the
deputy defense secretary.
>>NOORY: Who was the senator
of Nevada at the time.
>>POPE: Yes.
And he's writing to Lyn Buchanan
the third, deputy defense
secretary.
And he's setting
out the consequences
of some of the things
that might stem
from a better understanding
of what we're dealing with,
the phenomenon.
And he talks about
exotic technologies
that we might be able to
understand, and then--
here's the key
thing-- replicate.
But look, there's a race
for this exotic technology.
And if we know about
this and can figure out
some of the technology,
so can the Russians and so
can the Chinese.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>POPE: And that's
why the secrecy.
And Harry Reid, he's
blunt about this.
He puts it on paper.
And he says, look, if the
Russians, or the Chinese,
or somebody else gets
this, figures it out first,
the consequences for
the United States
could be catastrophic,
if any of this
falls into the
hands of an enemy,
be they another nation
or a non-state actor.
And he finishes up by saying,
however, if we figure this out
and if we are first,
the United States
will retain its
preeminent position
in the world as a superpower.
>>NOORY: The late
Lieutenant Philip Corso
talked about how he was given
information from Roswell
for reverse engineering.
It was part of his mission
to take these artifacts
and give them to United
States corporations
to try to get them to
duplicate or figure out
what these things were.
Are we doing that today still?
Are we still trying
to figure out
how the technology works
and try to duplicate it?
>>POPE: I don't have
any insight into that,
but one of the
intriguing clues that
has come out with
the AATIP story
is talk about metamaterials.
Now, some people--
>>NOORY: Please,
explain what that is.
>>POPE: OK.
So exotic materials
that some people believe
have come from UFOs.
Now, are we talking about
debris from crashes?
And if so, are we talking
about the Roswell debris?
I don't know.
But we do know
that AATIP and then
through AATIP, Bigelow Aerospace
looked at these metamaterials.
Now, look, everything--
I've heard these
described in the media
as mystery metals.
They're not mystery.
Everything sits somewhere
on the periodic table.
But there are--
>>NOORY: The elements in
the universe are the same.
They are the same.
>>POPE: They are.
Exactly.
However, however-- there
is a big however here,
and that's isotopic
ratio analysis.
Now, all individual elements
have different isotopes,
which is all to do with the
different numbers of protons
and orbiting the
neutrons, et cetera.
And what's
interesting about that
is that some analyses
of these metamaterials
looked at in the
AATIP Program seemed
to suggest
non-terrestrial origin.
And you can tell.
It's exactly the same.
When you do isotopic--
>>NOORY: Non-terrestrial.
>>POPE: Non-terrestrial.
>>NOORY: That's important.
>>POPE: It's the
same test that you
do to prove that
somebody is selling
you a genuine meteorite
as opposed to just
a rock from their backyard.
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>POPE: I mean, of
course, if you're
going to pay tens of
thousands of dollars,
you need to know
it's the real thing.
>>NOORY: You want the meteorite.
>>POPE: Absolutely.
Isotopic ratio analysis proves
that it has non-terrestrial
origin, because it's subjected
to cosmic rays that we
don't get here on Earth,
because we're protected from
the atmosphere--
by our atmosphere.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
>>POPE: So this is
the sort of thing.
Yeah.
AATIP was looking at that.
>>NOORY: In 2013,
our dear friend
Stephen Bassett put together the
Citizen Hearing on Disclosure.
It was an amazing event,
where he put together
a number of speakers
in Washington, DC
to come forward
to talk about what
they know about the possible
extraterrestrial presence.
You were one of
those who testified.
>> (ON VIDEO) --superiors tell
you that part of your job is
to ridicule English citizens
or any UK citizen who had maybe
filed a report or a sighting
that was legitimate?
>>POPE: Nobody told me
to do that directly, sir.
But there was certainly a
sort of unofficial policy
that in responding
to media inquiries,
the press office
would deliberately
slip in terms such as "little
green men" and "flying saucers"
to disparage and
downplay the subject.
>> (ON VIDEO) And they
haven't told you what to say
as a private citizen, have they?
>>POPE: No, sir.
But when I've written books,
which I have in the past,
I've had to submit those for
official security clearance.
>>NOORY: What did you think
of that hearing that day?
>>POPE: It was a great event.
Steve Bassett and
the other organizers
are to be congratulated
for putting it on.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>POPE: But I think
it's really best viewed
as a dry run for the real thing.
And the people that were
interviewing us and quizzing
us, and grilling us,
as you saw there,
they were former congresspeople
and one former senator.
But what I think the
Citizen Hearing did
is it gave us a blueprint for
what congressional hearings now
would look like on this.
>>NOORY: Would look like.
Just so everybody
knows, this was not
a real congressional hearing.
It was a mockup
with real people.
>>POPE: Absolutely.
The format was real.
The people who were
interviewing us
had all served as
congresspeople.
>>NOORY: They asked questions
they would have asked
had they still been in Congress.
>>POPE: Very much so.
And they were pretty aggressive
in their questioning.
And this was not a typical
UFO conference, where people
can just get up and speak.
This was us under the spotlight.
>>NOORY: And you don't
want to lie under oath.
We know what that's all about.
>>POPE: No, absolutely not.
I mean, and if--
I wouldn't anyway.
But of course, if we get actual
congressional hearings maybe
on AATIP, maybe on the
phenomenon as a whole--
and there are
current discussions
almost literally as we speak
about that very thing--
that is what they
will look like.
>>NOORY: Have you ever
been asked a question
that you didn't answer directly
because you just didn't
want anybody to know something?
Has that ever happened
in your career?
>>POPE: Oh, quite a lot.
I mean, not just on UFOs, but
on all sorts of other subjects,
whether it's Iraq or
counterterrorism policy,
or intelligence.
>>NOORY: And the reason
you hold back is why?
>>POPE: It's two reasons.
Firstly, my sense of loyalty
to the United Kingdom
and my oath of loyalty.
But secondly, my secrecy
oath, my security oath,
which, of course, is not just a
question of one's own morality,
but it's the law.
I will not--
>>NOORY: Even at this point?
>>POPE: Even at this point.
I took early retirement from
the Ministry of Defence in 2006,
but my secrecy oath
binds me for life.
I mean, just because
you've left--
>>NOORY: Well, how do you
know, Nick, what to say
and what not to say so you
don't violate that oath?
>>POPE: Well, I have through my
21 years in government a very
clear idea about what's
classified and what isn't.
But if in doubt, I will
do one of two things.
I'll either err on
the side of caution
and not discuss the matter.
Or I will even now reach out
to the Ministry of Defence
and say, look, I've
been asked about this.
Has this been
declassified or must
I continue to hold the line
on this and not comment on it?
>>NOORY: And they would probably
prefer you don't comment on it,
I would guess.
>>POPE: Absolutely.
In most cases.
But of course, I watch--
I keep a close eye on what
the Ministry of Defence is
releasing, either under
freedom of information requests
or to the National Archives as
part of the general programs.
So I keep a watchful eye on--
and I say every now and then,
oh, that's come out, has it?
>>NOORY: If the Citizen
Hearing for Disclosure
became a real hearing
on Capitol Hill,
would you testify if asked?
>>POPE: Yes.
And in fact, I have had
already some exchanges
with at least one staffer on
the Armed Services Committee.
>>NOORY: Why did it happen?
>>POPE: Yeah.
So I've given some
briefing already.
Now, I know that the Senate
Armed Services Committee
is having a look at this.
As I say, I've had some
communication with them.
I know that they
have also interviewed
a couple of the Navy pilots
who chased the UFOs, one
of the radar operators.
The House Armed Services
Committee is also involved.
And even the space subcommittee
of the main Science
and Technology Committee
is having a look at this.
I think it more properly sits
in the Armed Services Committee,
because I can't imagine that the
military and the intelligence
community would be
happy with anything
other than either the Armed
Services Committee or one
of the subcommittees.
And there's one
subcommittee, by the way,
which concentrates on, amongst
other things, emerging threats.
And I think that is
a very logical place
to put this if it doesn't go
to the full committee, that is.
>>NOORY: I think
that's critical here,
because we have had our
airspace violated by something.
And we don't know what it is.
Or we're not publicly
telling us what it is.
And to me, that's critical.
These could be Russian craft.
Who knows?
And our airspace
is being violated.
We need to get to
the bottom of this.
>>POPE: Absolutely.
I agree completely.
Anything in our airspace that
does those sorts of things
that we saw on those videos
is, in and of itself,
this is a defense and
national security issue.
>>NOORY: Huge.
>>POPE: I mean,
before you even get
to the first bit of analysis,
it is automatically a defense
and national security issue.
>>NOORY: I mean, these
things could have been
North Korean carrying nukes.
Who knows?
>>POPE: Yeah.
Government, when
it looks at this,
it looks at it through the lens
of threats and opportunities.
If you talk to
anyone in government,
particularly in the
intelligence analysis community,
you will hear those
two words all the time.
What are the threats?
And what are the opportunities?
And it's not an accident,
therefore, that the T in AATIP
stands for Threat.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
And that threat is
very real, isn't it?
>>POPE: It is.
Absolutely.
There is a technology here.
And if that technology is
better than us, smarter than us,
faster than us, well,
hey, we'd better
sit up and pay attention.
>>NOORY: How big were
these objects that we
saw in this US Navy film?
>>POPE: I'm not sure that
that data has been released.
I think when you look at
all the different readouts,
some of them have been redacted.
So even if I knew
the answer to that,
I'm not sure I could
say, because we--
>>NOORY: Could we even guess?
>>POPE: I think a couple of
the pilots have made estimates.
And I don't have the
figures at my fingertips.
But it's not huge.
It's not like the
flying football--
>>NOORY: But they are not small.
>>POPE: No, not small.
But they're not on the
scale of the almost--
I've heard this phrase;
I'm not kidding--
flying football fields
that have been--
>>NOORY: Correct.
Like the Phoenix Lights of '97.
>>POPE: Yeah.
Not on that scale.
But in one sense, it doesn't
matter what size this thing is.
It's the parameters in terms of
its speed and maneuverability
that is of more concern to us.
And when I say us, I mean
government corporately.
>>NOORY: What kind
of publicity do
you think new congressional
hearings would
garner if they held hearings?
>>POPE: Well, I think
it would be huge.
I think they would be--
>>NOORY: They'd probably
get "The New York
Times" to cover it,
"The Washington Post."
>>POPE: Oh, everyone would.
>>NOORY: This time.
>>POPE: Yeah.
Everyone would cover it.
I mean, clearly, the story
about AATIP, the fact
that it ran in "The
Times" and "The Post,"
and Politico, and
Fox, and CNN, I mean,
this isn't a political issue.
It's all the networks of all
political persuasions covered
this.
If we actually got
congressional hearings,
everyone would cover it.
That's why we might get that.
And I've called for it.
And I've had some
discussions about it.
But I can't help but
wonder whether because
of that publicity what
they'll actually do
is to continue what
they are already doing
and just make these sorts
of inquiries in private.
I don't know.
>>NOORY: There are a lot of
people, Dr. Barry Downing,
for example, who are convinced
that the UFO presence is
demonic.
And they staunchly believe that.
And you know, they may be right.
>>POPE: Well, I
suppose I shouldn't
be ridiculing people's beliefs.
But I have to say it is
ironic, to say the least,
if the roadblock to serious
scientific investigation
of UFOs isn't actually
as you would expect
from hardcore skeptics who
say there's no such thing,
but from another group
of believers who say,
there is such a thing,
but it's the devil.
>>NOORY: What do you think?
>>POPE: I don't believe in that.
I mean, I think whatever
we are dealing with here--
I mean, I'm not a believer
in gods and devils,
and angels, and
demons, and things.
I'm a nuts and bolts person.
I mean, there is something here.
And we do need proper credible
intelligence-led scientific
investigation.
We're not going to
get one if people
are talking about demons.
>>NOORY: No, we probably won't.
You're everywhere.
You were on CNN, talking about
the United Kingdom's file
as well.
>>CAMPBELL BROWN: The
British government
is continuing to
declassify and make
public some records
it's been holding pretty
close to the vest
about UFO sightings
during the '80s and '90s.
There are a few surprises
in these so-called X-Files.
Take a look.
>>WOLF BLITZER: Files detailing
hundreds of UFO sightings
reported to Britain's Defence
Ministry are now being released
online.
>> The release of more than
4,000 pages of documents
related to UFO sightings
revealed no fewer than 800
alleged encounters
over the last 20 years.
>> (ON VIDEO) 1996 was
the bumper alien year.
609 sightings, up fivefold
from the year before.
>>BROWN: We had the chance
this evening to talk
with one of the men
who helped investigate
some of these
astonishing UFO reports.
Nick Pope spoke to us a
little earlier from London.
Now, you were part of this
effort to track UFO sightings.
And I know 90% of
the time, it was
due to factors like weather,
or an airplane, or satellites.
But give us some examples
of the kind of reports
that you were looking into
that were unexplained.
>>POPE: Well, the cases that
were most interesting to us
at the Ministry of Defence were
the sorts of cases where UFOs
were seen by police officers
or pilots, and indeed,
where they were
tracked on radar.
Now, a good example
is a case from 1993,
where I led the investigation.
A UFO flew directly over two
Air Force bases in England.
And a report on that went up to
the Assistant Chief of the Air
Staff, one of Britain's most
senior military officers.
I mean, here we had huge
triangular-shaped craft
just flying over large
parts of the country
with total impunity.
>>BROWN: So what do
you think it was?
>>POPE: Well, we don't
know to this day.
And the case file
on this incident
is one of the files that's
been opened to the public.
And there's a marvelous quote
in it where my head of division
briefs these senior military
officers and says, in summary,
there is some
evidence to suggest
that an unidentified object or
objects flew over the United
Kingdom on the
night in question.
And frankly, we didn't
know what else to say.
We'd eliminated all the
conventional explanations.
And we were left with
a complete mystery.
>>NOORY: That's great
publicity, Nick.
CNN.
I mean, my gosh, that's the
equivalent of "The New York
Times" for cable.
>>POPE: Well, having
the chance to explain
to people on
mainstream television
that, no, this subject
isn't something
to be ridiculed or ignored,
that we do have military cases.
We do have evidence in terms
of good photos and videos
that imagery analysts within
the intelligence community
have looked at.
We have radar data.
We have all this.
And it is a serious defense
and national security issue.
The chance to do those
mainstream media interviews
is something that I am glad
to have the opportunity
to do because of my
government background.
>>NOORY: It's great
publicity, I think,
for trying to get to
the bottom of this.
>>POPE: Well, I try to be a
spokesperson for this subject
as a whole, because there's
no getting away from the fact
that, of course,
there will still
be media outlets
from time to time who
do just play this for laughs.
But when I get the opportunity
to have a serious discussion
about this and literally get
the message across to millions,
I see that as me playing a part
in a much wider process that
is aimed, really, at
almost acclimatizing
the public to this.
And where that
leads, I don't know.
But I think it's something
I'm happy to be a part of.
>>NOORY: Let's go back
to AATIP for a moment.
If it's still
ongoing, and we just
don't know what's
happening, what do you
think they're investigating?
Are there more cases like
the US Navy jets chasing
objects that we
don't know about?
>>POPE: Yes.
This is the ultimate
events-led phenomenon.
New sightings, of course, as you
know from your own radio and TV
shows, happen on a daily basis.
>>NOORY: Constantly.
>>POPE: Some of those cases
will involve the military.
I suspect that if
AATIP is still active,
they concentrate on
military sightings.
And what I suspect happens is
that if a pilot sees something
on a mission or if
a radar operator
tracks something, that will
go up the chain of command.
And at some point, there
will be someone who says,
I know where that goes.
And it gets sent to AATIP.
Or it wouldn't surprise
me if they've retitled it
now to throw people
further off the trail
now this is in
the public domain.
But clearly, somebody has
got to be looking at this.
And they will do all
the usual things.
They will probably sit the
pilots down and interview them
to get all the information.
They will analyze
the radar data.
They'll probably get into
satellite data as well.
>>NOORY: Of course.
>>POPE: Obviously,
the government
has 24/7 monitoring through
a wide range of technologies.
So there are a lot of resources
available to the state
and in particular,
to the secret state.
And clearly, the
work that AATIP was
doing in terms of research
and analysis, one hopes--
if they've overcome these
religious roadblocks--
continues with a view,
hopefully, to, A,
making a determination about
what we're dealing with, and B,
trying to understand some of
the technologies involved here
and to replicate
them for ourselves.
>>NOORY: What if there's
nothing we can do?
And hence, that's why
we're quiet about this.
>>POPE: That's a very
interesting and not entirely
implausible scenario.
Arthur C. Clarke once said
that any sufficiently advanced
technology will be
indistinguishable from magic.
What if that's what
we're dealing with?
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>POPE: I think the
scenario you've just set out
is completely plausible.
Look, if you gave a
caveman a cell phone,
he wouldn't even
know what it was.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>POPE: He would think
of it as a shiny rock.
But he wouldn't
know what it was.
And he certainly wouldn't
be able to construct one.
I suspect that's the
scenario that we're in.
In a universe nearly
14 billion years old,
we are not statistically likely
to encounter a civilization
50 years ahead of us.
>>NOORY: We're only 4.5 billion
years old of that 14 billion.
>>POPE: There might be
civilizations out there
with a billion years
head start on us.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>POPE: What would their
technology look like?
>>NOORY: Even a million years.
>>POPE: Yeah.
>>NOORY: I mean, look at
our pace every year, Nick,
with technology.
It seems to increase by
double every year or so.
It gets better and faster,
and better and faster.
Add a million years
to where we are today.
>>POPE: Yes.
>>NOORY: I mean, look what
we've done in 2,000 years.
We've gone from
the days of Jesus
walking with rocks and rubble
to where we're going to the moon
and beyond the solar system.
>>POPE: Yeah.
>>NOORY: 2,000 years.
>>POPE: And then you can
shrink it down even more
and say in just maybe 200
years or 250 years we've
come from maybe the Industrial
Revolution to the present day.
>>NOORY: And exploded.
>>POPE: And we've
almost literally
come from horse and cart to
stealth fighter and space
rocket in 200 years.
>>NOORY: Adding a million
years, let's say, to knowledge
is nothing in the
scheme of time in space.
>>POPE: It's a heart beat.
>>NOORY: It's nothing.
>>POPE: In cosmic timescales
and in geological timescales.
Yes.
So your scenario
is quite likely,
that we look at these
things, but at the end,
even with the full resources
of the intelligence
community and the military
researching and investigating,
the answer might just
be a helpless shrug,
and just we don't know.
>>NOORY: What would you--
if you went on national
television today--
well, you just about
are, aren't you--
and you had this ability to
talk to millions of people
about the
extraterrestrial presence,
what would you tell them?
>>POPE: I would say,
this is not a joke.
There is good hard
verifiable data.
We don't necessarily
know precisely what
we're dealing with, but this is
not a subject to be ridiculed.
It is a subject
that is the subject
of congressional
interest and should
be the subject of formal
congressional hearings.
But even I appreciate that
some of those hearings
may have to be done
behind closed doors,
because we will inevitably get
into highly classified areas.
>>NOORY: And a reporter
would say, Mr. Pope, are
we in any danger here?
>>POPE: You know, there's
a threat equation.
I know this sounds
kind of crazy.
But there is.
Threat is defined
in the military
as being a product of
capability and intent.
We know what the
capability is, or we
have some fairly good pointers.
For example, watching
those videos.
>>NOORY: Huge.
>>POPE: The capability is huge.
What we don't know is
what the intent is.
And any time in an equation
where you have an unknown,
the answer is also
going to be an unknown.
So my answer to
your question is we
don't know if there's a threat.
And therefore in government,
the prudent policy
is to assume that
there is a threat,
and then allow yourself
to be pleasantly
surprised and relieved if
it doesn't materialize,
as opposed to the other
way around, which is crazy,
assume there's no threat,
and then get caught out
if it does prove to be hostile.
>>NOORY: Nick, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
Great information.
>>POPE: Thank you.
>>NOORY: He is a former
member of the United
Kingdom's Ministry of Defence.
His job was to look at UFO
cases as they crossed his desk.
Remarkable.
He has gone public with
many of these cases.
He's the real deal.
I'm George Noory, and thanks
for watching "Beyond Belief."